START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* units: (units).       Units conversion and scientific calculation.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY

   This file documents the GNU `units' command for unit conversion.
This is edition 2.00 for `units' Version 2.00.

   Copyright (C) 1996, 1997, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2004, 2005, 2007,
2011, 2012 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

   This file is free software; the author gives unlimited permission to
copy, translate and/or distribute it, with or without modifications, as
long as this notice is preserved.

Units Conversion
****************

This manual describes the `units' command for units conversion, and how
you can use it to convert units from one scale to another.

   This is Edition 2.00 of `The Units Conversion Manual' for `units'
Version 2.00.

1 Overview of `units'
*********************

The `units' program converts quantities expressed in various systems of
measurement to their equivalents in other systems of measurement.  Like
many similar programs, it can handle multiplicative scale changes. It
can also handle nonlinear conversions such as Fahrenheit to Celsius.(1)
*Note Temperature Conversions::.  The program can also perform
conversions from and to sums of units, such as converting between
meters and feet plus inches.

   Beyond simple unit conversions, `units' can be used as a
general-purpose scientific calculator that keeps track of units in its
calculations.  You can form arbitrary complex mathematical expressions
of dimensions including sums, products, quotients, powers, and even
roots of dimensions.  Thus you can ensure accuracy and dimensional
consistency when working with long expressions that involve many
different units that may combine in complex ways.

   The units are defined in an external data file.  You can use the
extensive data file that comes with this program, or you can provide
your own data file to suit your needs.  You can also use your own data
file to supplement the standard data file.

   Basic operation is simple: you enter the units that you want to
convert _from_ and the units that you want to convert _to_.  You can
use the program interactively with prompts, or you can use it from the
command line.

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) But Fahrenheit to Celsius is linear, you insist.  Not so.  A
transformation T is linear if T(x+y)=T(x)+T(y) and this fails for
T(x)=ax+b.  This transformation is affine, but not linear.

2 Interacting with `units'
**************************

To invoke units for interactive use, type `units' at your shell prompt.
The program will print something like this:

     Currency exchange rates from 04/23/12
     2516 units, 85 prefixes, 65 nonlinear units

     You have:

At the `You have:' prompt, type the quantity and units that you are
converting _from_.  For example, if you want to convert ten meters to
feet, type `10 meters'.  Next, `units' will print `You want:'.  You
should type the units you want to convert _to_.  To convert to feet,
you would type `feet'.  If the `readline' library was compiled in then
the tab key can be used to complete unit names. *Note Readline
Support::, for more information about `readline'.  To quit the program
press Ctrl-C or Ctrl-D under Unix.  Under Windows press Ctrl-Z.

   The answer will be displayed in two ways.  The first line of output,
which is marked with a `*' to indicate multiplication, gives the result
of the conversion you have asked for.  The second line of output, which
is marked with a `/' to indicate division, gives the inverse of the
conversion factor.  If you convert 10 meters to feet, `units' will print

         * 32.808399
         / 0.03048

which tells you that 10 meters equals about 32.8 feet.  The second
number gives the conversion in the opposite direction.  In this case,
it tells you that 1 foot is equal to about 0.03 dekameters since the
dekameter is 10 meters.  It also tells you that 1/32.8 is about 0.03.

   The `units' program prints the inverse because sometimes it is a
more convenient number.  In the example above, for example, the inverse
value is an exact conversion: a foot is exactly 0.03048 dekameters.
But the number given the other direction is inexact.

   If you convert grains to pounds, you will see the following:

     You have: grains
     You want: pounds
             * 0.00014285714
             / 7000

>From the second line of the output you can immediately see that a grain
is equal to a seven thousandth of a pound.  This is not so obvious from
the first line of the output.  If you find  the output format
confusing, try using the `--verbose' option: 

     You have: grain
     You want: aeginamina
             grain = 0.00010416667 aeginamina
             grain = (1 / 9600) aeginamina

If you request a conversion between units that measure reciprocal
dimensions, then `units' will display the conversion results with an
extra note indicating that reciprocal conversion has been done: 

     You have: 6 ohms
     You want: siemens
             reciprocal conversion
             * 0.16666667
             / 6

Reciprocal conversion can be suppressed by using the `--strict' option.
As usual, use the `--verbose' option to get more comprehensible output: 

     You have: tex
     You want: typp
             reciprocal conversion
             1 / tex = 496.05465 typp
             1 / tex = (1 / 0.0020159069) typp

     You have: 20 mph
     You want: sec/mile
             reciprocal conversion
             1 / 20 mph = 180 sec/mile
             1 / 20 mph = (1 / 0.0055555556) sec/mile

If you enter incompatible unit types, the `units' program will print a
message indicating that the units are not conformable and it will
display the reduced form for each unit: 

     You have: ergs/hour
     You want: fathoms kg^2 / day
     conformability error
             2.7777778e-11 kg m^2 / sec^3
             2.1166667e-05 kg^2 m / sec

If you only want to find the reduced form or definition of a unit,
simply press <Enter> at the `You want:' prompt.  Here is an example:

     You have: jansky
     You want:
             Definition: fluxunit = 1e-26 W/m^2 Hz = 1e-26 kg / s^2

The output from `units' indicates that the jansky is defined to be
equal to a fluxunit which in turn is defined to be a certain combination
of watts, meters, and hertz.  The fully reduced (and in this case
somewhat more cryptic) form appears on the far right.

   Some named units are treated as dimensionless in some situations.
These units include the radian and steradian.  These units will be
treated as equal to 1 in units conversions.  Power is equal to torque
times angular velocity.  This conversion can only be performed if the
radian is dimensionless.

     You have: (14 ft lbf) (12 radians/sec)
     You want: watts
             * 227.77742
             / 0.0043902509

Named dimensionless units are not treated as dimensionless in other
contexts.  They cannot be used as exponents so for example,
`meter^radian' is not allowed.  

   If you want a list of options you can type `?' at the `You want:'
prompt.  The program will display a list of named units that are
conformable with the unit that you entered at the `You have:' prompt
above.  Conformable unit _combinations_ will not appear on this list.

   Typing `help' at either prompt displays a short help message.  You
can also type `help' followed by a unit name.  This will invoke a pager
on the units data base at the point where that unit is defined.  You
can read the definition and comments that may give more details or
historical information about the unit.  (You can generally quit out of
the page by pressing `q'.)

   Typing `search' TEXT will display a list of all of the units whose
names contain TEXT as a substring along with their definitions.  This
may help in the case where you aren't sure of the right unit name.

3 Using `units' Non-Interactively
*********************************

The `units' program can perform units conversions non-interactively
from the command line.  To do this, type the command, type the original
unit expression, and type the new units you want.  If a units
expression contains non-alphanumeric characters, you may need to protect
it from interpretation by the shell using single or double quote
characters.

   If you type

     units "2 liters" quarts

then `units' will print

         * 2.1133764
         / 0.47317647

and then exit.  The output tells you that 2 liters is about 2.1 quarts,
or alternatively that a quart is about 0.47 times 2 liters.

   If the conversion is successful, then `units' will return success
(zero) to the calling environment.  If you enter  non-conformable units
then `units' will print a message giving the reduced form of each unit
and it will return failure (nonzero) to the calling environment.

   When you invoke `units' with only one argument, it will print out
the definition of the specified unit.  It will return failure if the
unit is not defined and success if the unit is defined.

4 Unit Definitions
******************

The conversion information is read from a units data file that is
called `definitions.units' and is usually located in the
`/usr/share/units' directory.  If you invoke `units' with the `-V'
option, it will print the location of this file.  The default file
includes definitions for all familiar units, abbreviations and metric
prefixes.  It also includes many obscure or archaic units.

   Many constants of nature are defined, including these:

     pi          ratio of circumference to diameter
     c           speed of light
     e           charge on an electron
     force       acceleration of gravity
     mole        Avogadro's number
     water       pressure per unit height of water
     Hg          pressure per unit height of mercury
     au          astronomical unit
     k           Boltzman's constant
     mu0         permeability of vacuum
     epsilon0    permittivity of vacuum
     G           Gravitational constant
     mach        speed of sound

The standard data file includes atomic masses for all of the elements
and numerous other constants.  Also included are the densities of
various ingredients used in baking so that `2 cups flour_sifted' can be
converted to `grams'.  This is not an exhaustive list.  Consult the
units data file to see the complete list, or to see the definitions
that are used.

   The `pound' is a unit of mass.  To get force, multiply by the force
conversion unit `force' or use the shorthand `lbf'.  (Note that `g' is
already taken as the standard abbreviation for the gram.)  The unit
`ounce' is also a unit of mass.  The fluid ounce is `fluidounce' or
`floz'.  British capacity units that differ from their US counterparts,
such as the British Imperial gallon, are prefixed with `br'.  Currency
is prefixed with its country name: `belgiumfranc', `britainpound'.

   When searching for a unit, if the specified string does not appear
exactly as a unit name, then the `units' program will try to remove a
trailing `s', `es'.  Next units will replace a trailing `ies' with `y'.
If that fails, `units' will check for a prefix.  The database includes
all of the standard metric prefixes.  Only one prefix is permitted per
unit, so `micromicrofarad' will fail.  However, prefixes can appear
alone with no unit following them, so `micro*microfarad' will work, as
will `micro microfarad'.

   To find out which units and prefixes are available, read the standard
units data file, which is extensively annotated.

4.1 English Customary Units
===========================

English customary units differ in various ways in different regions.
In Britain a complex system of volume measurements featured different
gallons for different materials such as a wine gallon and ale gallon
that different by twenty percent.  This complexity was swept away in
1824 by a reform that created an entirely new gallon, the British
Imperial gallon defined as the volume occupied by ten pounds of water.
Meanwhile in the USA the gallon is derived from the 1707 Winchester
wine gallon, which is 231 cubic inches.  These gallons differ by about
twenty percent.  By default if `units' runs in the `en_GB' locale you
will get the British volume measures.  If it runs in the `en_US' locale
you will get the US volume measures.  In other locales the default
values are the US definitions.  If you wish to force different
definitions then set the environment variable `UNITS_ENGLISH' to either
`US' or `GB' to set the desired definitions independent of the locale.

   Before 1959, the value of a yard (and other units of measure defined
in terms of it) differed slightly among English-speaking countries.  In
1959, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, the United
States, and South Africa adopted the Canadian value of 1 yard =
0.9144 m (exactly), which was approximately halfway between the values
used by the UK and the US; it had the additional advantage of making
1 inch = 2.54 cm (exactly).  This new standard was termed the
"International Yard".  Australia, Canada, and the UK then defined all
customary lengths in terms of the International Yard (Australia did not
define the furlong or rod); because many US land surveys were in terms
of the pre-1959 units, the US continued to define customary surveyors'
units (furlong, chain, rod, and link) in terms of the previous value
for the foot, which was termed the "US survey foot".  The US defined a
"US survey mile" as 5280 US survey feet, and defined a "statute mile"
as a US survey mile.  The US values for these units differ from the
international values by about 2 ppm.

   The `units' program uses the international values for these units;
the US values can be obtained by using either the `US' or the `survey'
prefix.  In either case, the simple familiar relationships among the
units are maintained, e.g., 1 `furlong' = 660 `ft', and 1 `USfurlong' =
660 `USft', though the metric equivalents differ slightly between the
two cases.  The `US' prefix or the `survey' prefix can also be used to
obtain the US survey mile and the value of the US yard prior to 1959,
e.g., `USmile' or `surveymile' (but _not_ `USsurveymile').  To get the
US value of the statute mile, use either `USstatutemile' or `USmile'.

   Except for distances that extend over hundreds of miles (such as in
the US State Plane Coordinate System), the differences in the miles are
usually insignificant:

     You have: 100 surveymile - 100 mile
     You want: inch
             * 12.672025
             / 0.078913984

The pre-1959 UK values for these units can be obtained with the prefix
`UK'.

   In the US, the acre is officially defined in terms of the US survey
foot, but `units' uses a definition based on the international foot.
If you want the official US acre use `USacre' and similarly use
`USacrefoot' for the official US version of that unit.  The difference
between these units is about 4 parts per million.

5 Unit Expressions
******************

5.1 Operators
=============

You can enter more complicated units by combining units with operations
such as powers, multiplication, division, addition, subtraction, and
parentheses for grouping.  You can use the customary symbols for these
operators when `units' is invoked with its default options.
Additionally, `units' supports some extensions, including high priority
multiplication using a space, and a high priority numerical  division
operator (`|') that can simplify some expressions.

   Powers of units can be specified using the `^' character as shown in
the following example, or by simple concatenation of a unit and its
exponent: `cm3' is equivalent to `cm^3'; if the exponent is more than
one digit, the `^' is required.  An exponent like `2^3^2' is evaluated
right to left as usual.  The `^' operator has the second highest
precedence.  You can also use `**' as an exponent operator.  

     You have: cm^3
     You want: gallons
             * 0.00026417205
             / 3785.4118

     You have: arabicfoot * arabictradepound * force
     You want: ft lbf
             * 0.7296
             / 1.370614

You multiply units using a space or an asterisk (`*').  The example
above shows both forms.  You can divide units using the slash (`/') or
with `per'.  

     You have: furlongs per fortnight
     You want: m/s
             * 0.00016630986
             / 6012.8727

When a unit includes a prefix, exponent operators apply to the
combination, so `centimeter^3' gives cubic centimeters.  If you separate
the prefix from the unit with any multiplication operator, such as
`centi meter^3', then the prefix is treated as a separate unit, so the
exponent does not apply.  The second example would be a hundredth of a
cubic meter, not a centimeter.

   Multiplication using a space  has a higher precedence than division
using a slash and is evaluated left to right; in effect, the first `/'
character marks the beginning of the denominator of a unit expression.
This makes it simple to enter a quotient with several terms in the
denominator: `W / m^2 Hz'.  If you multiply with `*' then you must
group the terms in the denominator with parentheses: `W / (m^2 * Hz)'.

   The higher precedence of the space operator may not always be
advantageous.  For example, `m/s s/day' is equivalent to `m / s s day'
and has dimensions of length per time cubed.  Similarly, `1/2 meter'
refers to a unit of reciprocal length equivalent to 0.5/meter, perhaps
not what you would intend if you entered that expression.  The `*'
operator is convenient for multiplying a sequence of quotients.  With
the `*' operator, the example above becomes `m/s * s/day', which is
equivalent to `m/day'.  Similarly, you could write `1/2 * meter' to get
half a meter.  Alternatively, parentheses can be used for grouping: you
could write `(1/2) meter' to get half a meter.  *Note Complicated Unit
Expressions::, for an illustration of the various options.

   The `units' program supports another option for numerical fractions.
You can indicate division of _numbers_ with the vertical bar (`|'), so
if you wanted half a meter you could write `1|2 meter'.  This operator
has the highest precedence, so you can write the square root of two
thirds `2|3^1|2'.  You cannot use the vertical bar to indicate division
of non-numerical units (e.g., `m|s' results in an error message).  

     You have: 1|2 inch
     You want: cm
             * 1.27
             / 0.78740157

You can use parentheses for grouping:

     You have: (1/2) kg / (kg/meter)
     You want: league
             * 0.00010356166
             / 9656.0833

5.2 Sums and Differences of Units
=================================

Outside of the SI, it is sometimes desirable to add values of different
units.  You may also wish to use `units' as a calculator that keeps
track of units.  Sums of conformable units are written with the `+'
character, and differences with the `-' character.  

     You have: 2 hours + 23 minutes + 32 seconds
     You want: seconds
             * 8612
             / 0.00011611705

     You have: 12 ft + 3 in
     You want: cm
             * 373.38
             / 0.0026782366

     You have: 2 btu + 450 ft lbf
     You want: btu
             * 2.5782804
             / 0.38785542

The expressions that are added or subtracted must reduce to identical
expressions in primitive units, or an error message will be displayed:

     You have: 12 printerspoint - 4 heredium
                                           ^
     Illegal sum of non-conformable units

As usual, the precedence for `+' and `-' is lower than that of the
other operators.  A fractional quantity such as 2 1/2 cups can be given
as `(2+1|2) cups'; the parentheses are necessary because multiplication
has higher precedence than addition.  If you omit the parentheses,
`units' attempts to add `2' and `1|2 cups', and you get an error
message:

     You have: 2+1|2 cups
                        ^
     Illegal sum or difference of non-conformable units

The expression could also be correctly written as `(2+1/2) cups'.  If
you write `2 1|2 cups' the space is interpreted as _multiplication_ so
the result is the same as `1 cup'.

   The `+' and `-' characters sometimes appears in exponents like
`3.43e+8'.  This leads to an ambiguity in an expression like `3e+2 yC'.
The unit `e' is a small unit of charge, so this can be regarded as
equivalent to `(3e+2) yC' or `(3 e)+(2 yC)'.  This ambiguity is
resolved by always interpreting `+' and `-' as part of an exponent if
possible.

5.3 Numbers as Units
====================

For `units', numbers are just another kind of unit.  They can appear as
many times as you like and in any order in a unit expression.  For
example, to find the volume of a box that is 2 ft by 3 ft by 12 ft in
steres, you could do the following:

     You have: 2 ft 3 ft 12 ft
     You want: stere
             * 2.038813
             / 0.49048148

     You have: $ 5 / yard
     You want: cents / inch
             * 13.888889
             / 0.072
And the second example shows how the dollar sign in the units conversion
can precede the five.  Be careful:  `units' will interpret `$5' with no
space as equivalent to `dollar^5'.

5.4 Built-in Functions
======================

Several built-in functions are provided: `sin', `cos', `tan', `ln',
`log', `log2', `exp', `acos', `atan' and `asin'.  The `sin', `cos', and
`tan' functions require either a dimensionless argument or an argument
with dimensions of angle.

     You have: sin(30 degrees)
     You want:
             Definition: 0.5

     You have: sin(pi/2)
     You want:
             Definition: 1

     You have: sin(3 kg)
                       ^
     Unit not dimensionless

The other functions on the list require dimensionless arguments.  The
inverse trigonometric functions return arguments with dimensions of
angle.

   If you wish to take roots of units, you may use the `sqrt' or
`cuberoot' functions.  These functions require that the argument have
the appropriate root.  You can obtain higher roots by using fractional
exponents:

     You have: sqrt(acre)
     You want: feet
             * 208.71074
             / 0.0047913202

     You have: (400 W/m^2 / stefanboltzmann)^(1/4)
     You have:
             Definition: 289.80882 K

     You have: cuberoot(hectare)
                               ^
     Unit not a root

5.5 Complicated Unit Expressions
================================

The `units' program is especially helpful in ensuring accuracy and
dimensional consistency when converting lengthy unit expressions.  For
example, one form of the Darcy-Weisbach fluid-flow equation is

      Delta P = (8/pi^2) rho f L (Q^2 / d^5)

where  \Delta P is the pressure drop, \rho is the mass density, f is
the (dimensionless) friction factor, L is the length of the pipe, Q is
the volumetric flow rate, and d is the pipe diameter.  It might be
desired to have the equation in the form

        Delta P = A1 rho f L (Q^2 / d^5)

that accepted the user's normal units; for typical units used in the US,
the required conversion could be something like

     You have: (8/pi^2)(lbm/ft^3)ft(ft^3/s)^2(1/in^5)
     You want: psi
             * 43.533969
             / 0.022970568

The parentheses allow individual terms in the expression to be entered
naturally, as they might be read from the formula.  Alternatively, the
multiplication could be done with the `*' rather than a space; then
parentheses are needed only around `ft^3/s' because of its exponent:

     You have: 8/pi^2 * lbm/ft^3 * ft * (ft^3/s)^2 /in^5
     You want: psi
             * 43.533969
             / 0.022970568

Without parentheses, and using spaces for multiplication, the previous
conversion would need to be entered as

     You have: 8 lb ft ft^3 ft^3 / pi^2 ft^3 s^2 in^5
     You want: psi
             * 43.533969
             / 0.022970568

5.6 Backwards Compatibility: `*' and `-'
========================================

The original `units' assigned multiplication a higher precedence than
division using the slash.  This differs from the usual precedence
rules, which give multiplication and division equal precedence, and can
be confusing for people who think of units as a calculator.

   The star operator (`*') included in this `units' program has, by
default, the same precedence as division, and hence follows the usual
precedence rules.  For backwards compatibility you can invoke `units'
with the `--oldstar' option.  Then `*' has a higher precedence than
division, and the same precedence as multiplication using the space.

   Historically, the hyphen (`-') has been used in technical
publications to indicate products of units, and the original `units'
program treated it as a multiplication operator.  Because `units'
provides several other ways to obtain unit products, and because `-' is
a subtraction operator in general algebraic expressions, `units' treats
the binary `-' as a subtraction operator by default.  For backwards
compatibility use the `--product' option, which causes `units' to treat
the binary `-' operator as a product operator.  When `-' is a
multiplication operator it has the same precedence as multiplication
with a space, giving it a higher precedence than division.

   When `-' is used as a unary operator it negates its operand.
Regardless of the `units' options, if `-' appears after `(' or after
`+' then it will act as a negation operator.  So you can always compute
20 degrees minus 12 minutes by entering `20 degrees + -12 arcmin'.  You
must use this construction when you define new units because you cannot
know what options will be in force when your definition is processed.  

6 Nonlinear Unit Conversions
****************************

Nonlinear units are represented using functional notation.  They make
possible nonlinear unit conversions such as temperature.

6.1 Temperature Conversions
===========================

Conversions between temperatures are different from linear conversions
between temperature _increments_--see the example below.  The absolute
temperature conversions are handled by units starting with `temp', and
you must use functional notation.  The temperature-increment
conversions are done using units starting with `deg' and they do not
require functional notation.

     You have: tempF(45)
     You want: tempC
             7.2222222

     You have: 45 degF
     You want: degC
             * 25
             / 0.04

Think of `tempF(X)' not as a function but as a notation that indicates
that X should have units of `tempF' attached to it.  *Note Defining
Nonlinear Units::.  The first conversion shows that if it's 45 degrees
Fahrenheit outside, it's 7.2 degrees Celsius.  The second conversion
indicates that a change of 45 degrees Fahrenheit corresponds to a
change of 25 degrees Celsius.  The conversion from `tempF(X)' is to
absolute temperature, so that

     You have: tempF(45)
     You want: degR
             * 504.67
             / 0.0019814929
gives the same result as

     You have: tempF(45)
     You want: tempR
             * 504.67
             / 0.0019814929

But if you convert `tempF(X)' to `degC', the output is probably not
what you expect:

     You have: tempF(45)
     You want: degC
             * 280.37222
             / 0.0035666871

The result is the temperature in K, because `degC' is defined as `K',
the Kelvin. For consistent results, use the `tempX' units when
converting to a temperature rather than converting a temperature
increment.

6.2 Other Nonlinear Units
=========================

Some other examples of nonlinear units are numerous different ring
sizes and wire gauges, the grit sizes used for abrasives, the decibel
scale, shoe size, scales for the density of sugar (e.g. baume).  The
standard data file also supplies units for computing the area of a
circle and the volume of a sphere.  See the standard units data file
for more details.  Wire gauges with multiple zeroes are signified using
negative numbers where two zeroes is `-1'.  Alternatively, you can use
the synonyms `g00', `g000', and so on that are defined in the standard
units data file.  

     You have: wiregauge(11)
     You want: inches
             * 0.090742002
             / 11.020255

     You have: brwiregauge(g00)
     You want: inches
             * 0.348
             / 2.8735632

     You have: 1 mm
     You want: wiregauge
             18.201919

     You have: grit_P(600)
     You want: grit_ansicoated
             342.76923

The last example shows the conversion from P graded sand paper, which
is the European standard and may be marked "P600" on the back, to the
USA standard.  

   You can compute the area of a circle using the nonlinear unit,
`circlearea'.  You can also do this using the circularinch or
circleinch.  The next example shows two ways to compute the area of a
circle with a five inch radius and one way to compute the volume of a
sphere with a radius of one meter.  

     You have: circlearea(5 in)
     You want: in2
             * 78.539816
             / 0.012732395

     You have: 10^2 circleinch
     You want: in2
             * 78.539816
             / 0.012732395

     You have: spherevol(meter)
     You want: ft3
             * 147.92573
             / 0.0067601492

7 Unit Lists: Conversion to Sums of Units
*****************************************

Outside of the SI, it is sometimes desirable to convert a single unit
to a sum of units--for example, feet to feet plus inches.  The
conversion _from_ sums of units was described in *note Sums and
Differences of Units::, and is a simple matter of adding the units with
the `+' sign:

     You have: 12 ft + 3 in + 3|8 in
     You want: ft
             * 12.28125
             / 0.081424936

Although you can similarly write a sum of units to convert _to_, the
result will not be the conversion to the units in the sum, but rather
the conversion to the particular sum that you have entered:

     You have: 12.28125 ft
     You want: ft + in + 1|8 in
             * 11.228571
             / 0.089058524

The unit expression given at the `You want:' prompt is equivalent to
asking for conversion to multiples of `1 ft + 1 in + 1|8 in', which is
1.09375 ft, so the conversion in the previous example is equivalent to

     You have: 12.28125 ft
     You want: 1.09375 ft
             * 11.228571
             / 0.089058524

In converting to a sum of units like miles, feet and inches, you
typically want the largest integral value for the first unit, followed
by the largest integral value for the next, and the remainder converted
to the last unit.  You can do this conversion easily with `units' using
a special syntax for lists of units.  You must list the desired units
in order from largest to smallest, separated by the semicolon (`;')
character:

     You have: 12.28125 ft
     You want: ft;in;1|8 in
             12 ft + 3 in + 3|8 in

The conversion always gives integer coefficients on the units in the
list, except possibly the last unit when the conversion is not exact:

     You have: 12.28126 ft
     You want: ft;in;1|8 in
             12 ft + 3 in + 3.00096 * 1|8 in

The order in which you list the units is important:

     You have: 3 kg
     You want: oz;lb
             105 oz + 0.051367866 lb

     You have: 3 kg
     You want: lb;oz
             6 lb + 9.8218858 oz

Listing ounces before pounds produces a technically correct result, but
not a very useful one.  You must list the units in descending order of
size in order to get the most useful result.

   Ending a unit list with the separator `;' has the same effect as
repeating the last unit on the list, so `ft;in;1|8 in;' is equivalent to
`ft;in;1|8 in;1|8 in'.  With the example above, this gives

     You have: 12.28126 ft
     You want: ft;in;1|8 in;
             12 ft + 3 in + 3|8 in + 0.00096 * 1|8 in

in effect separating the integer and fractional parts of the
coefficient for the last unit.  If you instead prefer to round the last
coefficient to an integer you can do this with the `--round' (`-r')
option.  With the previous example, the result is

     You have: 12.28126 ft
     You want: ft;in;1|8 in
             12 ft + 3 in + 3|8 in (rounded down to nearest 1|8 in)

When you use the `-r' option, repeating the last unit on the list has
no effect (e.g., `ft;in;1|8 in;1|8 in' is equivalent to `ft;in;1|8
in'), and hence neither does ending a list with a `;'.  With a single
unit and the `-r' option, a terminal `;' _does_ have an effect: it
causes `units' to treat the single unit as a list and produce a rounded
value for the single unit.  Without the extra `;', the `-r' option has
no effect on single unit conversions.  This example shows the ouput
using the `-r' option:

     You have: 12.28126 ft
     You want: in
             * 147.37512
             / 0.0067854058

     You have: 12.28126 ft
     You want: in;
             147 in (rounded down to nearest in)

Each unit that appears in the list must be conformable with the first
unit on the list, and of course the listed units must also be
comformable with the _You have_ unit that you enter.

     You have: meter
     You want: ft;kg
                  ^
     conformability error
             ft = 0.3048 m
             kg = 1 kg

     You have: meter
     You want: lb;oz
     conformability error
             1 m
             0.45359237 kg

In the first case, `units' reports the disagreement between units
appearing on the list.  In the second case, `units' reports
disagreement between the unit you entered and the desired conversion.
This conformability error is based on the first unit on the unit list.

   Other common candidates for conversion to sums of units are angles
and time:

     You have: 23.437754 deg
     You want; deg;arcmin;arcsec
         23 deg + 26 arcmin + 15.9144 arcsec

         You have: 7.2319 hr
         You want: hr;min;sec
             7 hr + 13 min + 54.84 sec

In North America, recipes for cooking typically measure ingredients by
volume, and use units that are not always convenient multiples of each
other.  Suppose that you have a recipe for 6 and you wish to make a
portion for 1.  If the recipe calls for 2 1/2 cups of an ingredient,
you might wish to know the measurements in terms of measuring devices
you have available, you could use `units' and enter

     You have: (2+1|2) cup / 6
     You want: cup;1|2 cup;1|3 cup;1|4 cup;tbsp;tsp;1|2 tsp;1|4 tsp
             1|3 cup + 1 tbsp + 1 tsp

By default, if a unit in a list begins with fraction of the form 1|X
and its multiplier is an integer, the fraction is given as the product
of the multiplier and the numerator; for example,

     You have: 12.28125 ft
     You want: ft;in;1|8 in;
             12 ft + 3 in + 3|8 in

In many cases, such as the example above, this is what is wanted, but
sometimes it is not.  For example, a cooking recipe for 6 might call
for 5 1/4 cup of an ingredient, but you want a portion for 2, and your
1-cup measure is not available; you might try

     You have: (5+1|4) cup / 3
     You want: 1|2 cup;1|3 cup;1|4 cup
             3|2 cup + 1|4 cup

This result might be fine for a baker who has a 1 1/2-cup measure (and
recognizes the equivalence), but it may not be as useful to someone
with more limited set of measures, who does want to do additional
calculations, and only wants to know "How many 1/2-cup measures to I
need to add?"  After all, that's what was actually asked.  With the
`--show-factor' option, the factor will not be combined with a unity
numerator, so that you get

     You have: (5+1|4) cup / 3
     You want: 1|2 cup;1|3 cup;1|4 cup
             3 * 1|2 cup + 1|4 cup

A user-specified fractional unit with a numerator other than 1 is never
overridden, however--if a unit list specifies `3|4 cup;1|2 cup', a
result equivalent to 1 1/2 cups will always be shown as `2 * 3|4 cup'
whether or not the `--show-factor' option is given.

   Some applications for unit lists may be less obvious.  Suppose that
you have a postal scale and wish to ensure that it's accurate at 1 oz,
but have only metric calibration weights.  You might try

     You have: 1 oz
     You want: 100 g;50 g; 20 g;10 g;5 g;2 g;1 g;
             20 g + 5 g + 2 g + 1 g + 0.34952312 * 1 g

You might then place one each of the 20 g, 5 g, 2 g, and 1 g weights on
the scale and hope that it indicates close to

     You have: 20 g + 5 g + 2 g + 1 g
     You want: oz;
             0.98767093 oz

Appending `;' to `oz' forces a one-line display that includes the unit;
here the integer part of the result is zero, so it is not displayed.

   A unit list such as

     cup;1|2 cup;1|3 cup;1|4 cup;tbsp;tsp;1|2 tsp;1|4 tsp

can be tedious to enter.  The `units' program provides shorthand names
for some common combinations:

     hms         hours, minutes, seconds
     dms         angle: degrees, minutes, seconds
     time        years, days, hours, minutes and seconds
     usvol       US cooking volume: cups and smaller

Using these shorthands, or "unit list aliases", you can do the
following conversions:

     You have: anomalisticyear
     You want: time
             1 year + 25 min + 3.4653216 sec
     You have: 1|6 cup
     You want: usvol
             2 tbsp + 2 tsp

You cannot combine a unit list alias with other units: it must appear
alone at the `You want:' prompt.

   You can display the definition of a unit list by pressing <Enter> at
the `You have:' prompt:

     You have: dms
             Definition: unit list, deg;arcmin;arcsec

When you specify compact output with `--compact', `--terse' or `-t' and
perform conversion to a unit list, `units' lists the conversion factors
for each unit in the list, separated by semicolons.

     You have: year
     You want: day;min;sec
     365;348;45.974678

Unlike the case of regular output, zeros _are_ included in this output
list:

     You have: liter
     You want: cup;1|2 cup;1|4 cup;tbsp
     4;0;0;3.6280454

8 Invoking `units'
******************

You invoke `units' like this:

     units [OPTIONS] [FROM-UNIT [TO-UNIT]]

If the FROM-UNIT and TO-UNIT are omitted, then the program will use
interactive prompts to determine which conversions to perform.  *Note
Interactive Use::.  If both FROM-UNIT and TO-UNIT are given, `units'
will print the result of that single conversion and then exit.  If only
FROM-UNIT appears on the command line, `units' will display the
definition of that unit and exit.  Units specified on the command line
may need to be quoted to protect them from shell interpretation and to
group them into two arguments.  *Note Command Line Use::.

   The following options allow you to read in an alternative units file,
check your units file, or change the output format:

`-c'
`--check'
     Check that all units and prefixes defined in the units data file
     reduce to primitive units.  Print a list of all units that cannot
     be reduced.  Also display some other diagnostics about suspicious
     definitions in the units data file.  Only definitions active in
     the current locale are checked.  You should always run `units'
     with this option after modifying a units data file.

`--check-verbose'
     Like the `--check' option, this option prints a list of units that
     cannot be reduced.  But to help find unit  definitions that cause
     endless loops, it lists the units as they are checked.  If `units'
     hangs, then the last unit to be printed has a bad definition.
     Only definitions active in the current locale are checked.

`-o FORMAT'
`--output-format FORMAT'
     Use the specified FORMAT for numeric output; the format is a
     subset of that for the printf function in the ANSI C standard.
     Only a numeric format (`E' or `e' for scientific notation, `f' for
     fixed-point decimal, or `G' or `g' to specify the number of
     significant figures) is allowed.  The default format is `%.8g';
     for greater precision, you could specify `-o %.15g'.  *Note
     Numeric Output Format::, and the documentation for printf() for
     more detailed descriptions of the format specification.

`-e'
`--exponential'
     Set the numeric output format to exponential (i.e., scientific
     notation), like that used in the Unix `units' program.

`-f FILENAME'
`--file FILENAME'
     Instruct `units' to load the units file `filename'.  You can
     specify up to 25 units files on the command line.  When you use
     this option, `units' will load _only_ the files you list on the
     command line; it will not load the standard file or your personal
     units file unless you explicitly list them.  If FILENAME is the
     empty string (`-f ""'), the default units file (or that specified
     by `UNITSFILE') will be loaded in addition to any others specified
     with `-f'.

`-h'
`--help'
     Print out a summary of the options for `units'.

`-m'
`--minus'
     Causes `-' to be interpreted as a subtraction operator.  This is
     the default behavior.

`-p'
`--product'
     Causes `-' to be interpreted as a multiplication operator when it
     has two operands.  It will act as a negation operator when it has
     only one operand: `(-3)'.  By default `-' is treated as a
     subtraction operator.

`--oldstar'
     Causes `*' to have the old-style precedence, higher than the
     precedence of division so that `1/2*3' will equal `1/6'.

`--newstar'
     Forces `*' to have the new (default) precedence that follows the
     usual rules of algebra: the precedence of `*' is the same as the
     precedence of `/', so that `1/2*3' will equal `3/2'.

`--compact'
     Give compact output featuring only the conversion factor.  This
     turns off the `--verbose' option.

`-q'
`--quiet'
`--silent'
     Suppress prompting of the user for units and the display of
     statistics about the number of units loaded.

`-n'
`--nolists'
     Disable conversion to unit lists.

`-r'
`--round'
     When converting to a combination of units given by a unit list,
     round the value of the last unit in the list to the nearest
     integer.

`-S'
`--show-factor'
     When converting to a combination of units specified in a list,
     always show a non-unity factor before a unit that begins with a
     fraction with a unity denominator.  By default, if the unit in a
     list begins with fraction of the form 1|X and its multiplier is an
     integer other than 1, the fraction is given as the product of the
     multiplier and the numerator (e.g., `3|8 in' rather than `3 * 1|8
     in').  In some cases, this is not what is wanted; for example, the
     results for a cooking recipe might show `3 * 1|2 cup' as `3|2 cup'.
     With the `--show-factor' option, a result equivalent to 1.5 cups
     will display as `3 * 1|2 cup' rather than `3|2 cup'.  A
     user-specified fractional unit with a numerator other than 1 is
     never overridden, however--if a unit list specifies `3|4 cup;1|2
     cup', a result equivalent to 1 1/2 cups will always be shown as `2
     * 3|4 cup' whether or not the `--show-factor' option is given.

`-s'
`--strict'
     Suppress conversion of units to their reciprocal units.  For
     example, `units' will normally convert hertz to seconds because
     these units are reciprocals of each other.  The strict option
     requires that units be strictly conformable to perform a
     conversion, and will give an error if you attempt to convert hertz
     to seconds.

`-1'
`--one-line'
     Give only one line of output (the forward conversion).  Do not
     print the reverse conversion.  If a reciprocal conversion is
     performed then `units' will still print the "reciprocal
     conversion" line.

`-t'
`--terse'
     Give terse output when converting units.  This option can be used
     when calling `units' from another program so that the output is
     easy to parse.  This option has the combined effect of these
     options:  `--strict' `--quiet' `--one-line' `--compact'.

`-v'
`--verbose'
     Give slightly more verbose output when converting units.  When
     combined with the `-c' option this gives the same effect as
     `--check-verbose'.

`-V'
`--version'
     Print program version number, tell whether the `readline' library
     has been included, and give the location of the default units data
     file.

`-l LOCALE'
`--locale LOCALE'
     Force a specified locale such as `en_GB' to get British
     definitions by default.  This overrides the locale determined from
     system settings or environment variables.  *Note Locale::, for a
     description of locale format.


9 Adding Your Own Definitions
*****************************

9.1 Units Data Files
====================

The units and prefixes that `units' can convert are defined in the units
data file, typically `/usr/share/units/definitions.units'.  Although
you can extend or modify this data file if you have appropriate user
privileges, it's usually better to put extensions in separate files so
that the definitions will be preserved when you update `units'.

   You can include additional data files in the units database using
the `!include' command in the standard units data file. For example

     !include    /usr/local/share/units/local.units

might be appropriate for a site-wide supplemental data file.  The
location of the `!include' statement in the standard units data file is
important; later definitions replace earlier ones, so any definitions
in an included file will override definitions before the `!include'
statement in the standard units data file.  With normal invocation, no
warning is given about redefinitions; to ensure that you don't have an
unintended redefinition, run `units -c' after making changes to any
units data file.

   If you want to add your own units in addition to or in place of
standard or site-wide supplemental units data files, you can include
them in the `.units' file in your home directory.  If this file exists
it is read after the standard units data file, so that any definitions
in this file will replace definitions of the same units in the standard
data file or in files included from the standard data file.  This file
will not be read if any units files are specified on the command line.
(Under Windows the personal units file is named `unitdef.units'.)

   The `units' program first tries to determine your home directory
from the `HOME' environment variable.  On systems running Microsoft
Windows, if `HOME' does not exist, `units' attempts to find your home
directory from `HOMEDRIVE' and `HOMEPATH'.  Running `units -V' will
display the location and name of your personal units file.

   You can specify an arbitrary file as your personal units data file
with the `MYUNITSFILE' environment variable; if this variable exists,
its value is used without searching your home directory.

9.2 Defining New Units and Prefixes
===================================

A unit is specified on a single line by giving its name and an
equivalence.  Comments start with a `#' character, which can appear
anywhere in a line.  The backslash character (`\') acts as a
continuation character if it appears as the last character on a line,
making it possible to spread definitions out over several lines if
desired.  A file can be included by giving the command `!include'
followed by the file's name.  The `!' must be the first character on the
line.  The file will be sought in the same directory as the parent file
unless you give a full path.  The name of the file to be included
cannot contain the comment character `#'.  

   Unit names must not contain any of the operator characters `+', `-',
`*', `/', `|', `^', `;', `~', the comment character `#', or
parentheses.  They cannot begin or end with an underscore (`_'), a
comma (`,') or a decimal point (`.').  Names cannot begin with a digit,
and if a name ends in a digit other than zero, the digit must be
preceded by a string beginning with an underscore, and afterwards
consisting only of digits, decimal points, or commas.  For example,
`foo_2', `foo_2,1', or `foo_3.14' would be valid names but `foo2' or
`foo_a2' would be invalid.  You could define nitrous oxide as

     N2O     nitrogen 2  + oxygen

but would need to define nitrogen dioxide as

     NO_2    nitrogen + oxygen 2

Be careful to define new units in terms of old ones so that a reduction
leads to the primitive units, which are marked with `!' characters.
Dimensionless units are indicated by using the string `!dimensionless'
for the unit definition.  

   When adding new units, be sure to use the `-c' option to check that
the new units reduce properly.  If you create a loop in the units
definitions, then `units' will hang when invoked with the `-c' option.
You will need to use the `--check-verbose' option, which prints out
each unit as it is checked.  The program will still hang, but the last
unit printed will be the unit that caused the infinite loop.

   If you define any units that contain `+' characters, carefully check
them because the `-c' option will not catch non-conformable sums.  Be
careful with the `-' operator as well.  When used as a binary operator,
the `-' character can perform addition or multiplication depending on
the options used to invoke `units'.  To ensure consistent behavior use
`-' only as a unary negation operator when writing units definitions.
To multiply two units leave a space or use the `*' operator with care,
recalling that it has two possible precedence values and may require
parentheses to ensure consistent behavior.  To compute the difference
of `foo' and `bar' write `foo+(-bar)' or even `foo+-bar'.

   Here is an example of a short data file that defines some basic
units:

     m       !               # The meter is a primitive unit
     sec     !               # The second is a primitive unit
     rad     !dimensionless  # A dimensionless primitive unit
     micro-  1e-6            # Define a prefix
     minute  60 sec          # A minute is 60 seconds
     hour    60 min          # An hour is 60 minutes
     inch    0.0254 m        # Inch defined in terms of meters
     ft      12 inches       # The foot defined in terms of inches
     mile    5280 ft         # And the mile

A unit that ends with a `-' character is a prefix.  If a prefix
definition contains any `/' characters, be sure they are protected by
parentheses.  If you define `half- 1/2' then `halfmeter' would be
equivalent to `1 / (2 meter)'.

9.3 Defining Nonlinear Units
============================

Some unit conversions of interest are nonlinear; for example,
temperature conversions between the Fahrenheit and Celsius scales
cannot be done by simply multiplying by conversion factors.

   When you give a linear unit definition such as `inch 2.54 cm' you
are providing information that `units' uses to convert values in inches
into primitive units of meters.  For nonlinear units, you give a
functional definition that provides the same information.

   Nonlinear units are represented using a functional notation.  It is
best to regard this notation not as a function call but as a way of
adding units to a number, much the same way that writing a linear unit
name after a number adds units to that number.  Internally, nonlinear
units are defined by a pair of functions that convert to and from
linear units in the data file, so that an eventual conversion to
primitive units is possible.

   Here is an example nonlinear unit definition:

     tempF(x) units=[1;K] (x+(-32)) degF + stdtemp ; \
                          (tempF+(-stdtemp))/degF + 32

A nonlinear unit definition comprises a unit name, a dummy parameter
name, two functions, and two corresponding units.  The functions tell
`units' how to convert to and from the new unit.  In order to produce
valid results, the arguments of these functions need to have the
correct dimensions.  To facilitate error checking, you may optionally
indicate units for these arguments.

   The definition begins with the unit name followed immediately (with
no spaces) by a `(' character.  In parentheses is the name of the
parameter.  Next is an optional specification of the units required by
the functions in this definition.  In the example above, the `tempF'
function requires an input argument conformable with `1'.  For normal
nonlinear units definitions the forward function will always take a
dimensionless argument.  The inverse function requires an input
argument conformable with `K'.  In general the inverse function will
need units that match the quantity measured by your nonlinear unit.
The purpose of the expression in brackets to enable `units' to perform
error checking on function arguments, and also to assign units to range
and domain specifications, which are described later.

   Next the function definitions appear.  In the example above, the
`tempF' function is defined by

     tempF(x) = (x+(-32)) degF + stdtemp

This gives a rule for converting `x' in the units `tempF' to linear
units of absolute temperature, which makes it possible to convert from
tempF to other units.

   In order to make conversions to Fahrenheit possible, you must give a
rule for the inverse conversions. The inverse will be `x(tempF)' and
its definition appears after a `;' character.  In our example, the
inverse is

     x(tempF) = (tempF+(-stdtemp))/degF + 32

This inverse definition takes an absolute temperature as its argument
and converts it to the Fahrenheit temperature.  The inverse can be
omitted by leaving out the `;' character, but then conversions to the
unit will be impossible.  If the inverse is omitted then the `--check'
option will display a warning.  It is up to you to calculate and enter
the correct inverse function to obtain proper conversions.  The
`--check' option tests the inverse at one point and prints an error if
it is not valid there, but this is not a guarantee that your inverse is
correct.

   If you wish to make synonyms for nonlinear units, you still need to
define both the forward and inverse functions.  Inverse functions can be
obtained using the `~' operator.  So to create a synonym for `tempF'
you could write

     fahrenheit(x) units=[1;K] tempF(x); ~tempF(fahrenheit)

You may define a function whose range and domain do not cover all of
the real numbers.  In this case `units' can handle errors better if you
specify an appropriate range and domain.  You specify the range and
domain as shown below.

     baume(d) units=[1;g/cm^3] domain=[0,130.5] range=[1,10] \
              (145/(145-d)) g/cm^3 ; (baume+-g/cm^3) 145 / baume

In this example the domain is specified after the `domain=' with the
endpoints given in brackets.  One of the end points can be omitted to
get an interval that goes to infinity.  So the range could be specified
as nonnegative by writing `range=[0,]'.  Both the range and domain are
optional and can appear independently and in any order along with the
`units' specification.  The values in the range and domain are attached
to the units given in the `units' specification.  If you don't specify
the units then the parameter inputs are reduced to primitive units for
the numeric comparison to the values you give in the range or domain.
In this case you should only use `range' or `domain' if the endpoints
are zero and infinity.

   Specifying the range and domain allows `units' to perform better
error checking and give more helpful error messages when you invoke
nonlinear units conversions outside of their bounds.  It also enables
the `-c' option to find a point in the domain to use for its point
check of your inverse definition.

   You may occasionally wish to define a function that operates on
units.  This can be done using a nonlinear unit definition.  For
example, the definition below provides conversion between radius and
the area of a circle.  This definition requires a length as input and
produces an area as output, as indicated by the `units=' specification.
Specifying the range as the nonnegative numbers can prevent cryptic
error messages.

     circlearea(r) units=[m;m^2] range=[0,]   pi r^2 ; sqrt(circlearea/pi)

Sometimes you may be interested in a piecewise linear unit such as many
wire gauges.  Piecewise linear units can be defined by specifying
conversions to linear units on a list of points.  Conversion at other
points will be done by linear interpolation.  A partial definition of
zinc gauge is

     zincgauge[in] 1 0.002, 10 0.02, 15 0.04, 19 0.06, 23 0.1

In this example, `zincgauge' is the name of the piecewise linear unit.
The definition of such a unit is indicated by the embedded `['
character.  After the bracket, you should indicate the units to be
attached to the numbers in the table.  No spaces can appear before the
`]' character, so a definition like `foo[kg meters]' is illegal;
instead write `foo[kg*meters]'.  The definition of the unit consists of
a list of pairs optionally separated by commas.  This list defines a
function for converting from the piecewise linear unit to linear units.
The first item in each pair is the function argument; the second item
is the value of the function at that argument (in the units specified
in brackets).  In this example, we define `zincgauge' at five points.
For example, we set `zincgauge(1)' equal to `0.002 in'.  Definitions
like this may be  more readable  if written using  continuation
characters as

     zincgauge[in] \
          1 0.002  \
         10 0.02   \
         15 0.04   \
         19 0.06   \
         23 0.1

With the preceding definition, the following conversion can be
performed:

     You have: zincgauge(10)
     You want: in
         * 0.02
         / 50
     You have: .01 inch
     You want: zincgauge
         5

If you define a piecewise linear unit that is not strictly monotonic,
then the inverse will not be well defined.  If the inverse is requested
for such a unit, `units' will return the smallest inverse.  The
`--check' option will print a warning if a non-monotonic piecewise
linear unit is encountered.

9.4 Defining Unit List Aliases
==============================

Unit list aliases are treated differently from unit definitions,
because they are a data entry shorthand rather than a true definition
for a new unit.  A unit list alias definition begins with `!unitlist'
and includes the alias and the definition;  for example, the aliases
included in the standard units data file are

     !unitlist   hms     hr;min;sec
     !unitlist   time    year;day;hr;min;sec
     !unitlist   dms     deg;arcmin;arcsec
     !unitlist   ftin    ft;in;1|8 in
     !unitlist   usvol   cup;3|4 cup;2|3 cup;1|2 cup;1|3 cup;1|4 cup;\
                         tbsp;tsp;1|2 tsp;1|4 tsp;1|8 tsp

Unit list aliases are only for unit lists, so the definition must
include a `;'.  Unit list aliases can never be combined with units or
other unit list aliases, so the definition of `time' shown above could
_not_ have been shortened to `year;day;hms'.  As usual, be sure to run
`units --check' to ensure that the units listed in unit list aliases
are conformable.

10 Numeric Output Format
************************

By default, results of conversions are shown to eight significant
figures; this can be changed with the `--exponential' and
`--output-format' options.  The former sets an exponential format
(i.e., scientific notation) like that used in the original Unix `units'
program; the latter allows the format to be given as that of the printf
function in the ANSI C standard.

   The format recognized with the `--output-format' option is a subset
of that for printf().  Only a floating-point format of the form
`%'[flag][width][`.'precision]type is allowed: it must begin with `%',
and must end with a floating-point type specifier (`E' or `e' for
scientific notation, `f' for fixed-point decimal, or `G' or `g' to
specify the number of significant figures).  The format specification
may include one optional flag (`+', `-', `#', or a space), followed by
an optional value for the minimum field width, and an optional
precision specification that begins with a period (e.g., `.6').  In
addition to the digits, the field width includes the decimal point, the
exponent, and the sign if any of these are shown.  A width
specification is typically used with fixed-point decimal to have
columns of numbers align at the decimal point; it normally is not
useful with `units'.  Non-floating-point type specifiers make no sense
for `units', and are forbidden.

   The default format is `%.8g'; for greater precision, you could
specify `-o %.15g'.  The `G' and `g' formats use exponential format
whenever the exponent would be less than -5, so the value 0.000013
displays as `1.3e-005'.  If you prefer fixed-point display, you might
specify `-o %.8f'; however, very small numbers may display very few
significant figures, and for very small numbers, may show nothing but
zeros.

   See the documentation for printf() for more detailed descriptions of
the format specification.

11 Localization
***************

Some units have different values in different locations.  The
localization feature accommodates this by allowing a units data file to
specify definitions that depend on the user's locale.

11.1 Locale
===========

A locale is a subset of a user's environment that indicates the user's
language and country, and some attendant preferences, such as the
formatting of dates.  The `units' program attempts to determine the
locale from the POSIX setlocale function; if this cannot be done,
`units' examines the environment variables `LC_CTYPE' and `LANG'.  On
POSIX systems, a locale is of the form LANGUAGE`_'COUNTRY, where
LANGUAGE is the two-character code from ISO 639-1 and COUNTRY is the
two-character code from ISO 3166-1; LANGUAGE is lower case and COUNTRY
is upper case. For example, the POSIX locale for the United Kingdom is
`en_GB'.

   On systems running Microsoft Windows, the value returned by
setlocale() is different from that on POSIX systems; `units' attempts
to map the Windows value to a POSIX value by means of a table in the
file `locale.map' in the same directory, typically
`/usr/local/share/units', as the default units data files.  The file
includes entries for many combinations of language and country, and can
be extended to include other combinations.  The `locale.map' comprises
two tab-separated columns; each entry is of the form

     WINDOWS-LOCALE   POSIX-LOCALE

where POSIX-LOCALE is as described above, and WINDOWS-LOCALE typically
spells out both the language and country.  For example, the entry for
the United States is

     English_United States   en_US

You can force `units' to run in a desired locale by using the `-l'
option.

   In order to create unit definitions for a particular locale you begin
a block of definitions in a unit datafile with `!locale' followed by a
locale name.  The `!' must be the first character on the line.  The
`units' program reads the following definitions only if the current
locale matches.  You end the block of localized units with
`!endlocale'.  Here is an example, which defines the British gallon.

     !locale en_GB
     gallon       4.54609 liter
     !endlocale

11.2 Additional Localization
============================

Sometimes the locale isn't sufficient to determine unit preferences.
There could be regional preferences, or a company could have specific
preferences.  Though probably uncommon, such differences could arise
with the choice of English customary units outside of English-speaking
countries.  To address this, `units' allows specifying definitions that
depend on environment variable settings.  The environment variables can
be controled based on the current locale, or the user can set them to
force a particular group of definitions.

   A conditional block of definitions in a units data file begins with
either `!var' or `!varnot' following by an environment variable name
and then a space separated list of values.  The leading `!' must appear
in the first column of a units data file, and the conditional block is
terminated by `!endvar'.  Definitions in blocks beginning with `!var'
are executed only if the environment variable is exactly equal to one
of the listed values.  Definitions in blocks beginning with `!varnot'
are executed only if the environment variable does _not_ equal any of
the list values.

   The inch has long been a customary measure of length in many places.
The word comes from the latin _uncia_ meaning "one twelfth," referring
to its relationship with the foot.  By the 20th century, the inch was
officially defined in English-speaking countries relative to the yard,
but until 1959, the yard differed slightly among those countries.  In
France the customary inch, which was displaced in 1799 by the meter,
had a different length based on a french foot.  These customary
definitions could be accomodated as follows:

     !var INCH_UNIT usa
     yard          3600|3937 m
     !endvar
     !var INCH_UNIT canada
     yard          0.9144 meter
     !endvar
     !var INCH_UNIT uk
     yard          0.91439841 meter
     !endvar
     !var INCH_UNIT canada uk usa
     foot          1|3 yard
     inch          1|12 foot
     !endvar
     !var INCH_UNIT france
     foot          144|443.296 m
     inch          1|12 foot
     line          1|12 inch
     !endvar
     !varnot INCH_UNIT usa uk france canada
     !message Unknown value for INCH_UNIT
     !endvar

When `units' reads the above definitions it will check the environment
variable `INCH_UNIT' and load only the definitions for the appropriate
section.  If `INCH_UNIT' is unset or is not set to one of the four
values listed then `units' will run the last block.  In this case that
block uses the `!message' command to display a warning message.
Alternatively that block could set default values.

   In order to create default values that are overridden by user
settings the data file can use the `!set' command, which sets an
environment variable _only if it is not already set_;  these settings
are only for the current `units' invocation and do not persist.  So if
the example above were preceded by `!set INCH_UNIT france' then this
would make `france' the default value for `INCH_UNIT'.  If the user had
set the variable in the environment before invoking `units', then
`units' would use the user's value.

   To link these settings to the user's locale you combine the `!set'
command with the `!locale' command.  If you wanted to combine the above
example with suitable locales you could do by _preceding_ the above
definition with the following:

     !locale en_US
     !set INCH_UNIT usa
     !endlocale
     !locale en_GB
     !set INCH_UNIT uk
     !endlocale
     !locale en_CA
     !set INCH_UNIT canada
     !endlocale
     !locale fr_FR
     !set INCH_UNIT france
     !endlocale
     !set INCH_UNIT france

These definitions set the overall default for `INCH_UNIT' to `france'
and set default values for four locales appropriately.  The overall
default setting comes last so that it only applies when `INCH_UNIT' was
not set by one of the other commands or by the user.

   If the variable given after `!var' or `!varnot' is undefined then
`units' prints an error message and ignores the definitions that
follow.  Use `!set' to create defaults to prevent this situation from
arising.  The `-c' option only checks the definitions that are active
for the current environment and locale, so when adding new definitions
take care to check that all cases give rise to a well defined set of
definitions.

12 Environment Variables
************************

The `units' program uses the following environment variables:

`HOME'
     Specifies the location of your home directory; it is used by
     `units' to find a personal units data file `.units'.  On systems
     running Microsoft Windows, `units' tries to determine your home
     directory from the `HOMEDRIVE' and `HOMEPATH' environment
     variables if `HOME' does not exist.

`LC_CTYPE, LANG'
     Checked to determine the locale if `units' cannot obtain it from
     the operating system.  Sections of the standard units data file
     are specific to certain locales.

`MYUNITSFILE'
     Specifies your personal units data file.  If this variable exists,
     `units' uses its value rather than searching your home directory
     for `.units'.  The personal units file will not be loaded if any
     data files are given using the `-f' option.

`PAGER'
     Specifies the pager to use for help and for displaying the
     conformable units.  The help function browses the units database
     and calls the pager using the `+n'N syntax for specifying a line
     number.  The default pager is `more'; `PAGER' can be used to
     specify alternatives such as `less', `pg', `emacs', or `vi'.

`UNITS_ENGLISH'
     Set to either `US' or `GB' to choose United States or British
     volume definitions, overriding the default from your locale.

`UNITSFILE'
     Specifies the units data file to use (instead of the default).
     You can only specify a single units data file using this
     environment variable.  If units data files are given using the `-f'
     option, the file specified by `UNITSFILE' will be not be loaded
     unless the `-f' option is given with the empty string
     (`units -f ""').


13 Unicode Support
******************

The standard units data file is written in Unicode using the UTF-8
encoding.  Portions of the file that are not plain ASCII begin with
`!utf8' and end with `!endutf8'.  As usual, the `!' must appear as the
first character on the line.  If a line of a data file contains byte
sequences that are invalid UTF-8 or non-printing UTF-8 then `units'
ignores the entire line.

   When `units' runs it checks the locale to determine the character
set.  If UTF-8 is listed, then `units' reads the utf8 definitions.  If
any other character set is in use, then `units' works in plain ASCII
without support for extended characters.

14 Readline Support
*******************

If the `readline' package has been compiled in, then when `units' is
used interactively, numerous command line editing features are
available.  To check if your version of `units' includes `readline',
invoke the program with the `--version' option.

   For complete information about `readline', consult the documentation
for the `readline' package.  Without any configuration, `units' will
allow editing in the style of emacs.  Of particular use with `units'
are the completion commands.

   If you type a few characters and then hit <ESC> followed by `?' then
`units' will display a list of all the units that start with the
characters typed.  For example, if you type `metr' and then request
completion, you will see something like this: 

     You have: metr
     metre             metriccup         metrichorsepower  metrictenth
     metretes          metricfifth       metricounce       metricton
     metriccarat       metricgrain       metricquart       metricyarncount
     You have: metr

If there is a unique way to complete a unitname, you can hit the <TAB>
key and `units' will provide the rest of the unit name.  If `units'
beeps, it means that there is no unique completion.  Pressing the <TAB>
key a second time will print the list of all completions.

15 Updating Currency Exchange Rates
***********************************

The units program includes currency exchange rates and prices for some
precious metals in the database.  Of course, these values change over
time, sometimes very rapidly, and `units' cannot provide real time
values.  To update the exchange rates run the `units_cur', which
rewrites the files containing the currency rates, typically
`/usr/local/share/units/currency.units'.  This program must be run with
suitable permissions to write the file.  To keep the rates updated
automatically, it could be run by a cron job on a Unix-like system, or
a similar scheduling program on a different system.  Currency exchange
rates are taken from Time Genie (`http://www.timegenie.com') and
precious metals pricing from Packetizer (`www.packetizer.com').  These
sites update once per day, so there is no benefit in running the update
script more often than daily.  You can run `units_cur' with a filename
specified on the command line and it will write the data to that file.
If you give `-' for the file it will write to standard output.

16 Database Command Syntax
**************************

UNIT DEFINITION
     Define a regular unit.

PREFIX- DEFINITION
     Define a prefix.

FUNCNAME(VAR) units=[IN-UNITS,OUT-UNITS] domain=[X1,X2] range=[Y1,Y2] DEFINITION(VAR) ; INVERSE(FUNCNAME)
     Define a nonlinear unit or unit function.  The three optional
     keywords `units=', `range=' and `domain=' can appear in any order.
     The definition of the inverse is optional.

TABNAME[OUT-UNITS] PAIR-LIST
     Define a piecewise linear unit.  The pair list gives the points on
     the table listed in ascending order.

!endlocale
     End a block of definitions beginning with `!locale'

!endutf8
     End a block of definitions begun with `!utf8'

!endvar
     End a block of definitions begun with `!var' or `!varnot'

!include FILE
     Include the specified file.

!locale VALUE
     Load the following definitions only of the locale is set to VALUE.

!message TEXT
     Display TEXT when the database is read in, unless the quiet option
     (`-q') is enabled.

!set VARIABLE VALUE
     Sets the environment variable, VARIABLE, to the specified value
     _only if_ it is not already set.

!unitlist ALIAS DEFINITION
     Define a unit list alias.

!utf8
     Load the following definitions only if `units' is running with
     UTF-8 enabled.

!var VARIABLE VALUE-LIST
     Load the following definitions only if the environment variable,
     VARIABLE is set to one of the values listed on the space separated
     value list. If VARIABLE is not set then `units' prints an error
     message and ignores the following definitions.

!varnot VARIABLE VALUE-LIST
     Load the following definitions only if the environment variable,
     VARIABLE is NOT set to one of the values listed on the space
     separated value list.  If VARIABLE is not set then `units' prints
     an error message and ignores the following definitions.


Index
*****

! to indicate primitive units:                 See 9.2.      (line 1184)
!endlocale:                                    See 11.       (line 1476)
!endutf8:                                      See 13.       (line 1672)
!include:                                      See 9.1.      (line 1142)
!locale:                                       See 11.       (line 1476)
!unitlist:                                     See 9.4.      (line 1416)
!utf8:                                         See 13.       (line 1672)
* operator:                                    See 5.1.      (line  373)
** operator:                                   See 5.1.      (line  359)
+ operator:                                    See 5.2.      (line  428)
- as multiplication operator:                  See 5.6.      (line  596)
- as subtraction operator:                     See 5.2.      (line  428)
--check (option for units):                    See 8.        (line  990)
--check-verbose (option for units):            See 8.        (line  998)
--compact (option for units):                  See 8.        (line 1057)
--file (option for units):                     See 8.        (line 1022)
--help (option for units):                     See 8.        (line 1033)
--locale (option for units):                   See 8.        (line 1130)
--minus (option for units):                    See 8.        (line 1037)
--newstar (option for units):                  See 8.        (line 1052)
--oldstar (option for units):                  See 8.        (line 1048)
--one-line (option for units):                 See 8.        (line 1104)
--output-format (option for units):            See 8.        (line 1006)
--product (option for units):                  See 8.        (line 1042)
--quiet (option for units):                    See 8.        (line 1063)
--silent (option for units):                   See 8.        (line 1063)
--strict (option for units):                   See 8.        (line 1095)
--terse (option for units):                    See 8.        (line 1111)
--verbose (option for units):                  See 8.        (line 1118)
--verbose-check (option for units):            See 8.        (line  998)
--version (option for units):                  See 8.        (line 1124)
-1 (option for units):                         See 8.        (line 1104)
-c (option for units):                         See 8.        (line  990)
-f (option for units):                         See 8.        (line 1022)
-h (option for units):                         See 8.        (line 1033)
-l (option for units):                         See 8.        (line 1130)
-m (option for units):                         See 8.        (line 1037)
-o (option for units):                         See 8.        (line 1006)
-p (option for units):                         See 8.        (line 1042)
-q (option for units):                         See 8.        (line 1063)
-s (option for units):                         See 8.        (line 1095)
-t (option for units):                         See 8.        (line 1111)
-V (option for units):                         See 8.        (line 1124)
-v (option for units):                         See 8.        (line 1118)
? for unit completion with readline:           See 14.       (line 1697)
? to show conformable units:                   See 2.        (line  177)
abrasive grit size:                            See 6.2.      (line  704)
addition of units:                             See 5.2.      (line  431)
additional units data files:                   See 9.1.      (line 1142)
backwards compatibility:                       See 5.6.      (line  585)
British Imperial measure:                      See 4.        (line  257)
circle, area of:                               See 6.2.      (line  710)
command, ! to indicate primitive units:        See 9.2.      (line 1184)
command, !endlocale:                           See 11.       (line 1476)
command, !endutf8:                             See 13.       (line 1672)
command, !endvar:                              See 11.       (line 1476)
command, !include:                             See 9.1.      (line 1142)
command, !locale:                              See 11.       (line 1476)
command, !message:                             See 11.       (line 1476)
command, !set:                                 See 11.       (line 1476)
command, !unitlist:                            See 9.4.      (line 1416)
command, !utf8:                                See 13.       (line 1672)
command, !var:                                 See 11.       (line 1476)
command, !varnot:                              See 11.       (line 1476)
command-line options:                          See 8.        (line  972)
command-line unit conversion:                  See 3.        (line  196)
commands in units database:                    See 16.       (line 1735)
compatibility:                                 See 5.6.      (line  585)
compatibility with earlier versions:           See 5.6.      (line  585)
completion, unit, using ? (readline only):     See 14.       (line 1697)
conformable units, ? to show:                  See 2.        (line  177)
currency, updating:                            See 15.       (line 1716)
Darcy-Weisbach equation:                       See 5.5.      (line  544)
data files, additional:                        See 9.1.      (line 1142)
database syntax summary:                       See 16.       (line 1735)
defining nonlinear units:                      See 9.3.      (line 1255)
defining prefixes:                             See 9.2.      (line 1184)
defining units:                                See 9.2.      (line 1184)
defining units with `-':                       See 5.6.      (line  612)
differences of units:                          See 5.2.      (line  431)
dimensionless units:                           See 2.        (line  175)
dimensionless units, defining:                 See 9.2.      (line 1214)
division of numbers:                           See 5.1.      (line  411)
division of units:                             See 5.1.      (line  373)
environment dependent definitions:             See 11.       (line 1476)
environment variable, HOME:                    See 12.       (line 1632)
environment variable, LANG:                    See 12.       (line 1639)
environment variable, LC_CTYPE:                See 12.       (line 1639)
environment variable, MYUNITSFILE <1>:         See 12.       (line 1644)
environment variable, MYUNITSFILE:             See 9.1.      (line 1177)
environment variable, PAGER:                   See 12.       (line 1650)
environment variable, UNITS_ENGLISH:           See 12.       (line 1657)
environment variable, UNITSFILE:               See 12.       (line 1661)
environment variables:                         See 12.       (line 1629)
exchange rates, updating:                      See 15.       (line 1716)
exponent operator:                             See 5.1.      (line  359)
fractions, numerical:                          See 5.1.      (line  411)
functions of units:                            See 9.3.      (line 1356)
functions, built in:                           See 5.4.      (line  501)
help <1>:                                      See 12.       (line 1650)
help:                                          See 2.        (line  182)
HOME environment variable:                     See 12.       (line 1632)
hyphen as multiplication operator:             See 5.6.      (line  596)
Imperial measure:                              See 4.        (line  257)
include files:                                 See 9.2.      (line 1193)
including additional units data files:         See 9.1.      (line 1142)
incompatible units:                            See 2.        (line  142)
interactive use:                               See 2.        (line   62)
international mile:                            See 4.1.      (line  295)
international yard:                            See 4.1.      (line  295)
invoking units:                                See 8.        (line  972)
LANG environment variable:                     See 12.       (line 1639)
LC_CTYPE environment variable:                 See 12.       (line 1639)
length measure, English customary:             See 4.1.      (line  295)
length measure, UK:                            See 4.1.      (line  295)
linear interpolation:                          See 9.3.      (line 1366)
locale:                                        See 11.1.     (line 1483)
locale.map:                                    See 11.1.     (line 1494)
localization:                                  See 11.       (line 1476)
measure, Imperial:                             See 4.        (line  257)
mile, international:                           See 4.1.      (line  295)
minus (-) operator, subtraction:               See 5.2.      (line  428)
multiplication of units:                       See 5.1.      (line  373)
multiplication, hyphen:                        See 5.6.      (line  596)
MYUNITSFILE environment variable <1>:          See 12.       (line 1644)
MYUNITSFILE environment variable:              See 9.1.      (line 1177)
non-conformable units:                         See 2.        (line  142)
non-interactive unit conversion:               See 3.        (line  196)
nonlinear unit conversions <1>:                See 9.3.      (line 1255)
nonlinear unit conversions:                    See 6.        (line  617)
nonlinear units, defining:                     See 9.3.      (line 1255)
nonlinear units, other:                        See 6.2.      (line  674)
numbers as units:                              See 5.3.      (line  480)
numeric output format:                         See 10.       (line 1439)
numerical fractions:                           See 5.1.      (line  411)
operator precedence:                           See 5.1.      (line  380)
operator, (**):                                See 5.1.      (line  359)
operator, caret (^):                           See 5.1.      (line  359)
operator, hyphen (-) as multiplication:        See 5.6.      (line  596)
operator, hyphen (-) as subtraction:           See 5.2.      (line  428)
operator, minus (-):                           See 5.2.      (line  428)
operator, per:                                 See 5.1.      (line  373)
operator, plus (+):                            See 5.2.      (line  428)
operator, slash (/):                           See 5.1.      (line  373)
operator, solidus (/):                         See 5.1.      (line  373)
operator, space:                               See 5.1.      (line  373)
operator, star (*):                            See 5.1.      (line  373)
operator, vertical bar (|):                    See 5.1.      (line  411)
operators:                                     See 5.1.      (line  346)
output format:                                 See 10.       (line 1439)
PAGER environment variable:                    See 12.       (line 1650)
parentheses <1>:                               See 9.3.      (line 1284)
parentheses <2>:                               See 9.2.      (line 1223)
parentheses <3>:                               See 5.5.      (line  564)
parentheses <4>:                               See 5.2.      (line  455)
parentheses:                                   See 5.1.      (line  359)
per operator:                                  See 5.1.      (line  373)
personal units data file:                      See 9.1.      (line 1162)
piecewise linear units:                        See 9.3.      (line 1366)
plus (+) operator:                             See 5.2.      (line  428)
powers:                                        See 5.1.      (line  359)
prefixes:                                      See 4.        (line  274)
prefixes and exponents:                        See 5.1.      (line  380)
prefixes, definition of:                       See 9.2.      (line 1184)
primitive units:                               See 9.2.      (line 1184)
products of units:                             See 5.1.      (line  373)
quotients of units:                            See 5.1.      (line  373)
readline, use with units:                      See 14.       (line 1687)
reciprocal conversion:                         See 2.        (line  117)
roots:                                         See 5.4.      (line  522)
setlocale function:                            See 11.1.     (line 1494)
slash (/) operator:                            See 5.1.      (line  373)
solidus (/) operator:                          See 5.1.      (line  373)
sphere, volume of:                             See 6.2.      (line  710)
square roots:                                  See 5.4.      (line  522)
star (*) operator:                             See 5.1.      (line  373)
State Plane Coordinate System, US:             See 4.1.      (line  295)
strict conversion:                             See 2.        (line  126)
subtraction of units:                          See 5.2.      (line  431)
sums and differences of units:                 See 5.2.      (line  428)
sums of units <1>:                             See 7.        (line  730)
sums of units:                                 See 5.2.      (line  431)
survey foot, US:                               See 4.1.      (line  295)
survey measure, US:                            See 4.1.      (line  295)
survey mile, US:                               See 4.1.      (line  295)
syntax of units database:                      See 16.       (line 1735)
temperature conversions:                       See 6.1.      (line  623)
Unicode support:                               See 13.       (line 1672)
unit completion using ? (readline only):       See 14.       (line 1697)
unit definitions:                              See 4.        (line  227)
unit expressions:                              See 5.        (line  343)
unit expressions, complicated:                 See 5.5.      (line  543)
unit list aliases, defining:                   See 9.4.      (line 1416)
unit lists:                                    See 7.        (line  730)
unit name completion:                          See 14.       (line 1700)
units data file, personal:                     See 9.1.      (line 1162)
units data files, additional:                  See 9.1.      (line 1142)
units definitions, adding:                     See 9.2.      (line 1184)
units definitions, changing:                   See 9.2.      (line 1184)
units functions:                               See 9.3.      (line 1356)
units quotients:                               See 5.1.      (line  373)
units, definition of:                          See 9.2.      (line 1184)
units, lookup method:                          See 4.        (line  265)
units, piecewise linear:                       See 9.3.      (line 1366)
units, primitive:                              See 9.2.      (line 1184)
units, sums and differences:                   See 5.2.      (line  428)
units, sums of:                                See 7.        (line  730)
UNITS_ENGLISH environment variable:            See 12.       (line 1657)
UNITSFILE environment variable:                See 12.       (line 1661)
US State Plane Coordinate System:              See 4.1.      (line  295)
US survey foot:                                See 4.1.      (line  295)
US survey measure:                             See 4.1.      (line  295)
US survey mile:                                See 4.1.      (line  295)
UTF-8:                                         See 13.       (line 1672)
verbose output:                                See 2.        (line  108)
vertical bar (|) operator:                     See 5.1.      (line  411)
volume measure, English customary:             See 4.1.      (line  280)
wire gauge:                                    See 6.2.      (line  682)
yard, international:                           See 4.1.      (line  295)
| operator:                                    See 5.1.      (line  411)
Table of Contents
*****************

Units Conversion
1 Overview of `units'
2 Interacting with `units'
3 Using `units' Non-Interactively
4 Unit Definitions
  4.1 English Customary Units
5 Unit Expressions
  5.1 Operators
  5.2 Sums and Differences of Units
  5.3 Numbers as Units
  5.4 Built-in Functions
  5.5 Complicated Unit Expressions
  5.6 Backwards Compatibility: `*' and `-'
6 Nonlinear Unit Conversions
  6.1 Temperature Conversions
  6.2 Other Nonlinear Units
7 Unit Lists: Conversion to Sums of Units
8 Invoking `units'
9 Adding Your Own Definitions
  9.1 Units Data Files
  9.2 Defining New Units and Prefixes
  9.3 Defining Nonlinear Units
  9.4 Defining Unit List Aliases
10 Numeric Output Format
11 Localization
  11.1 Locale
  11.2 Additional Localization
12 Environment Variables
13 Unicode Support
14 Readline Support
15 Updating Currency Exchange Rates
16 Database Command Syntax
Index


